We developed separate models for each BCR subunit to improve local prediction accuracy and avoid out-of-range prediction. However, this resulted in some sharp transitions in predictions across certain boundaries that coincide with large regional differences in density. This variation in density across a large study area presented challenges for mapping, and we had to balance mapping detail with aesthetics to produce meaningful national maps. We emphasize that categorical map legends necessarily introduce subjectivity into the interpretation of species’ distribution and abundance patterns, and note that the legend breaks we used may not be the best ones for any particular mapping need. We encourage users to download the raster predictions and develop their own maps for regional applications.

Based on previous work, we started by developing maps that used mean density (males/ha) within the model-building area (Stralberg et al. 2015) as a presence/absence threshold, with areas of density below this mean density (“absence”) represented in light yellow. However, we found that this did not adequately describe the abundance patterns of all species, especially those that are widely distributed. So we adjusted the minimum thresholds according to visual alignment with known range limits. If maps based on these mean density thresholds resulted in a non-trivial number of occurrence locations mapped as absence (light yellow), then we sequentially adjusted these thresholds downward until that was no longer the case (starting with 0.05, then 0.01, then 0.001). 0.001 males/ha was the lowest density that we allowed to be used for this lower density threshold. Equal-interval legends, capped at the 99th percentile of predictions, were used to classify remaining density predictions for mapping.

The trade-off to this mapping approach is that there is perceived "over-prediction" in non-range areas (usually in the north, and often only in some BCRs). In some cases this may be related to range map inaccuracies in northern regions, but it also has to do with the sparsity of data in the north and the model's inability to identify covariates that control presence/absence. Additional data are needed to map northern range limits more accurately.
