Model inputs consisted of 219 spatially explicit environmental covariates, as well as survey year (continuous) and survey type (binary).

To capture the influence of changing landscape conditions on avian density, we used vegetation maps from 2001 and 2011 (Beaudoin et al. 2014) and associated our survey data with the layer that represented the closest time period. Surveys conducted in 2005 or earlier were associated with the 2001 dataset, while surveys from 2006 and later were associated with the 2011 dataset. Vegetation variables were derived at a 250-m spatial resolution from k-nearest-neighbor (kNN) models that used forest sample plots from Canada’s National Forest Inventory combined with MODIS satellite imagery, as well as climate and terrain data (Beaudoin et al. 2014). Vegetation variables included pixel-level and landscape-level biomass of individual tree species and stand age. Landscape-level covariates were calculated using the focal function in the raster package for R, and were based on a moving-window average using a Gaussian weighting of surrounding pixels (one standard deviation = 750 m).

To capture other sources of landscape variation not represented in vegetation data, we supplemented the biomass and stand age covariates with several terrain, land use, and climate variables. Terrain metrics, calculated using the terrain function in the raster package for R were based on a 100-m digital elevation model for North America. Land-use and landcover variables were based on the 2005 MODIS-based 250-m North American landcover map (Commission for Environmental Cooperation). A binary (0/1) 1-km road variable (Venter et al. 2016) was used to account for the influence of roads at a broad scale. Climate variables were based on a 1-km Climate NA interpolation of 1981-2010 weather station data (Wang et al. 2016).
We pre-screened the environmental predictor variables to eliminate constant (no variation in a BCR subunit) or highly correlated (Pearson’s correlation > 0.9) variables. We also eliminated variables that never entered the cross-validated BRTs to further narrow the variable set for bootstrap to boost computing speed.
